There are many conflicting views on the subject of evolution and its ability to be reconciled with religious doctrine. 
In my mind, there need not be a conflict between scientific truth and religious truth. 
Truth is truth, regardless of the source, as long as the truth really is true. 
Both my faith and the theory of evolution are strongly supported by different forms of evidence, and so they’re probably both true. 
A reconciliation between these two truths is complicated for doctrinal reasons, but such a reconciliation is not impossible. 
Though finding the harmony between evolution and religion is not easy, there is no contradiction between the two.
I believe in following truth wherever it may lead. 
I accept all truth that can be sufficiently demonstrated with reasonable evidence. 
The living reality of Christ and the truth of His words as recorded in scripture and taught by prophets have been clearly and repeatedly demonstrated to me over the course of my life. 
Through the influence of the Holy Ghost and the physical answering of my prayers, I have come to know for sure that the doctrines received by revelation in Christ’s restored church are true. 
I have also been convinced, through a more empirical set of evidences, that evolutionary theory is true. 
Evolutionary theory can make specific predictions that are later verified, which is a powerful evidence for its truthfulness. 
For example, as shown in Neil Shubin’s book Your Inner Fish, current evolutionary theory can very accurately predict in which rock strata we will find particular fossils, even fossils that are not currently known to exist. 
We can find another evidence for evolution in the vestigial structures that many organisms have. 
Snakes, for example, possess almost all of the DNA required for making limbs; a modification of just 17 base pairs to their DNA causes limb production once again (see “Progressive Loss of Function in a Limb Enhancer during Snake Evolution,” http://www.cell.com/cell/fulltext/S0092-8674(16)31310-1). 
The presence of vestigial structures makes little sense outside of the context of being evolutionary leftovers. 
Because they are both strongly supported by evidence, I believe that both my faith and the mechanisms of evolution must be true.
Just because both my faith and the ideas behind evolution seem to be true does not mean that a reconciliation is easy. 
I struggled to find the harmony between the two. 
A fundamental premise of evolutionary theory is that for billions of years organisms have been reproducing and dying, but the doctrine of the Fall would make it seem that both death and reproduction began with the Fall. 
The scripture on the matter is fairly clear: “[I]f Adam had not transgressed … he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end. And they would have had no children…” (2 Nephi 2:22-23, emphasis added). 
In order to reconcile the apparent facts of evolution and my faith, I had to adopt the notion that the Creation was a very long, generational process that involved death and reproduction, and that the permanence of life found in Eden only began once evolutionary creation had stopped. 
A transfiguration of sorts probably happened when Adam was placed on the earth, however that placing may have happened. 
The only alternative, in my mind, is to believe that God intentionally placed misleading evidence that would indicate that a false creative process had occurred. 
However, I can see no purpose that this would serve other than confusing honest seekers of truth, something that I cannot believe that God would do. 
For me, it is easier to believe that we do not fully understand what is meant by the term “Creation” than to believe that God intended to mislead His children through false evidence.
In comparing evolutionary theory with religious thought, we have a situation in which two seemingly opposed viewpoints must simultaneously be true. 
The evidences for both are strong. 
The seeming opposition must only exist because of a lack of understanding about these subjects. 
When the day comes that all truth is revealed, we will see that neither science nor spirituality were ever opposed at all.
