Imagine looking in the mirror as you get ready for the day, but it’s not you that you see; it’s a fish. 
Imagine seeing a shark, or a salamander, or a rodent instead of your own reflection. 
In his aptly named book, Your Inner Fish, Neil Shubin explores the evolutionary past of the human race to present the deep and often beautiful connections that we share with such different creatures as sharks, salamanders, and rodents. 
He masterfully connects disparate elements of developmental biology, paleontology, and anatomy to understand the inner workings of the human body and show off our “inner fish,” that is, the ancestral connection we share with all life. 
Shubin does so very convincingly by providing solid evidence and fulfilling specific predictions, and he succeeds in creating a profoundly personal connection to otherwise cold and uninteresting subject matter.
This journey into the unexpectedly exciting world of our evolutionary past begins with one of Shubin’s greatest contributions to the world of paleontology and evolutionary biology: the discovery of the Tiktaalik fossil. 
First, Shubin creates a surprisingly personal connection between the reader and an otherwise abstract scientific field by masterfully illustrating the excitement of discovery. 
Shubin then demonstrates the predictive power of evolutionary theory by showing how he and his team were able to find a transitionary fossil between finned and tetrapod life in the very same age and type of rocks that they had predicted. 
A very powerful evidence for any scientific theory is its ability to predict accurately what will happen next in a certain situation. 
By showing that evolutionary theory can accurately predict such things as fossil distribution, Shubin starts his book by demonstrating empirically and through his own personal experience the strength and validity of the evolutionary foundation upon which he rests the rest of his claims.
Because Shubin’s main claim in Your Inner Fish is that we can better understand our own bodies by studying the bodies of other creatures, and because this claim is based upon our sharing a common ancestral heritage with other life on Earth, Shubin continues by using many different methods to showcase the deep similarities between seemingly unrelated forms of life. 
He cites the classic example of vertebrate arm structures, showing that such separate limb-types as wings, flippers, and arms have essentially the same structure with but slight modifications to the overarching “one bone-two bones-lotsa blobs-digits” pattern (Shubin, 2008, chap. 2, Seeing the Fish section, para. 5). 
After a comparative analysis of skeletal anatomy, Shubin turns to genetics and developmental biology for more evidence of life’s common ancestry. 
It turns out that there is a single genetic sequence known as “Sonic hedgehog” that is found in almost all animal life, including humans, that regulates limb development in embryos. 
This sequence is so similar between radically different forms of animal life that one can replace a mouse’s version of the sequence with a shark’s and have completely unchanged limb development in the resulting mouse. 
Later, Shubin’s analysis of developmental biology revealed how very similar embryonic anatomy is between all vertebrate life. 
Shubin drew connections between shark embryos, human embryos, and the resulting complexity of our own anatomy, showing how the homologies in our respective embryos carries over to our respective body plans as adults.
One of Your Inner Fish’s greatest strengths is its constant referral to and self-checking with the rest of scientific literature. 
Neil Shubin frequently cites the work of other scientists, specifically using their names and explaining their stories. 
There is nary a claim made that does not come with ample evidence and precedence. 
Further scientific analysis has upheld Shubin’s assertions. 
For example, Shubin argues in his book that changes in limb structure over time can be described by changes in when and how certain genes (such as Hox genes) are activated without necessarily changing those genes themselves, providing a shared genetic heritage for many life forms. 
Other researchers have shown that the different patterns in the pigmentation of Sophophora flies likely evolved by changes in how those flies regulated responses to their Hox genes without actually changing the genes themselves (Camino et al., 2015). 
The flies had exactly the same genetic heritage, showing a common ancestry, but were outwardly different. 
Other researchers found that replacement of the Sonic hedgehog gene in mice with almost any other version of the gene found in vertebrate life, even fish, will not change the development of limbs in mice. 
Replacement with the snake version of the gene will cause dramatic stunting of limb growth in mice, but slight editing of the snake version of the gene before insertion results in exactly the same limb growth as before (Kvon et al., 2016). 
This supports the idea of a deep genetic connection between vertebrate animal species, thus supporting Shubin’s claims.
Another example of how Shubin’s work is supported by the work of other scientists doesn’t involve genetics, but rather mirrors the Tiktaalik discovery. 
The mudskipper, a type of modern fish that spends much of its time on land, has been found to feed in a way that closely resembles the way in which terrestrial amphibians feed while still retaining a fish-like nature (Michel et al., 2015). 
This could illustrate how organisms were able to transition between aquatic suction-feeding and terrestrial sticky-tongue usage, providing further evidence for the connection between land animals, like us, and fish.
Perhaps the only real weaknesses that Your Inner Fish has is that Shubin is quite repetitive in making his points about human evolution. 
He often went to great lengths to explain many interesting details of some aspect of his assertions on human evolution, only to explain very similar aspects of nearly identical assertions in the immediately following chapter of his book. 
For example, each of his chapters on the evolutionary history of our senses seems to be a repetition of the same theme. 
Each chapter typically begins with a personal experience to interest the reader, demonstrates that similar genes in very different species perform virtually identical functions even when spliced into different organisms, present an unlikely “missing link” transitionary creature to showcase how different designs appeared throughout our evolutionary history, and then talks about how various selective pressures could have caused the development of novel ways of exploring our world with our senses. 
Shubin takes a valid and interesting point and develops it almost ad nauseum. 
Recent research has shown that introducing a delay on a scale of about two days between repetitions of information can increase long-term retention of the studied information as compared with immediate repetition of the studied material (Rawson, 2012). 
This correlation between delay between repetitions of study and long-term information retention is especially strong for remembering important, conceptual details. 
By repeating essentially the same concept again and again in rapid succession instead of introducing new concepts before repeating already taught concepts, Shubin is doing his readers a disservice. 
His book would stick longer and more clearly in the minds of his readers were he to vary his content more.
In spite of this weakness, Your Inner Fish is easily the most compelling and interesting book on evolutionary biology I have read. 
It presents otherwise obscure, technical information and presents it in a way that is relatively easy to understand for the average layperson. 
I found a beauty in developmental biology that I may not have ever found otherwise because of the great passion and excitement with which Shubin describes his field of work. 
He was able to connect this seemingly impersonal academic field to whomever reads his book in a way that encourages scientific interest in non-academics. 
Shubin convincingly makes his points and deepens our appreciation for the world around us and in us. 
I would highly recommend Your Inner Fish to anyone who wishes to learn more about the natural world in general, about biology in particular, or just wants a good, thought-provoking read.
